---
title: "Numbers in a nutshell, an update"
date: 2022-08-27
math: true
---

By [Robert Smith](https://twitter.com/stylewarning)

***

*We discuss numbers and math in Coalton, as they are so far. Coalton
is under active development, so this blog post may go out of date in
due time.*

***

{{< toc >}}

## Introduction

Coalton is statically typed, which presents some challenges in how we
work with numbers, both syntactically and semantically. For instance,
consider the following Common Lisp code:

```
CL-USER> (loop :for b :in '(2 2.0d0 -2) :do
           (loop :for p :in '(2 2.0 1/2) :do
             (format t "(expt ~A ~A) ~20T= ~A~%" b p (expt b p))))
(expt 2 2)          = 4
(expt 2 2.0)        = 4.0
(expt 2 1/2)        = 1.4142135
(expt 2.0d0 2)      = 4.0d0
(expt 2.0d0 2.0)    = 4.0d0
(expt 2.0d0 1/2)    = 1.4142135623730951d0
(expt -2 2)         = 4
(expt -2 2.0)       = 4.0
(expt -2 1/2)       = #C(8.6595606e-17 1.4142135)
```

We see that in Common Lisp, the `expt` function can take a variety of
possibly mixed input parameter types, and produce a variety of result
types, where input and output types in each invocation need not be
related (at least in some intrinsic sense, though they are through a
series of rules in the Common Lisp standard). In general, this type of
behavior won't happen in ordinary Coalton programs. In fact, Coalton's
most general exponentiation function `pow` requires that the input and
output types are all the same.

However, not all is peachy in Common Lisp. The `expt` function is not
extensible. It is locked in to the data types and methods of
computation that are stipulated by the Common Lisp standard. If you
happen to make your own `matrix` or `quaternion` or `gaussian-integer`
classes in Lisp, you'll have no luck using `expt` with them. The best
you can do is make your own function.

In Coalton, we have no such issue. In fact, Coalton code routinely
defines its own number types for particularly advanced mathematical
applications, without sacrificing efficiency in any way, since Coalton
can statically inline custom arithmetic automatically and without
fuss.

The goal of this post is intended more to be a tutorial or
quick-reference to numbers and math in Coalton, and less a
comprehensive justification of the state of affairs. We also don't
list every function and method available to users.

The standard library reference can be found
[here](https://coalton-lang.github.io/reference/) which has all of the
latest information about available functions. It is updated as the
`main` branch is updated.

We are assumed to be in the `coalton-user` package. A variety of
symbols in this post are actually in specific standard library
packages, usually `coalton-library/math/*`. These are listed
explicitly in the library reference.

## The concrete types

Signed integers: `I8`, `I16`, `I32`, `I64`, and a machine-sized
`IFix`. Arithmetic errors when out-of-bounds.

Unsigned integers: `U8`, `U16`, `U32`, `U64`, and a machine-sized
`UFix`. Arithmetic wraps around.

Unlimited-sized integer: `Integer` (but these are efficiently
represented when they're machine-sized)

Integer literals are "overloaded", they can represent whatever integer
type so long as the surrounding context permits. Lacking definitive
context, they're defaulted to `Integer`. One can construct the integer
`5` of type `T` using `(the T 5)`.

Machine float types: `Single-Float` and `Double Float`.

Float literals are as they are in Common Lisp, like `1.0f0` and
`1.0d0`.

Big floats: `Big-Float`

The number of bits of precision a `Big-Float` represents is controlled
by `with-precision` or `set-precision!`. There is no general literal
syntax, but all standard types can be converted into `Big-Float`s.

Rational numbers: `Fraction`

Fraction literals use Common Lisp ratio syntax, like `1/2`. It's also
valid to write `(the Fraction 2)`, but note that this is *not* a
conversion of `2`, but rather an interpretation of the literal
`2`. Fractions can be dynamically constructed from integers with
`mkFraction`.

Almost every number type can be dynamically constructed using the
`fromInt` function.

## Rudimentary classes

In much of the remainder of this post, we're going to summarize
various classes. We write `Cls :a` to mean a class `Cls` parameterized
by a type `:a`. Writing `Cls :a` indicates that `:a` is an instance of
`Cls`.

`Eq :a` means that `:a` can be compared for mathematical equality with
`==` or inequality with `/=`.

`Ord :a` means that `:a` can be compared with `>`, `>=`, `<`, and
`<=`.

`Into :a :b` means that `:a` can be converted faithfully into `:b` (like
`I8` to `I16`) with the `into` function.

`TryInto :a :b` means that `:a` can sometimes be converted into `:b`
(like `I16` to `I8`) with the `tryInto` function, but not always and
may error. This function returns a `Result String :b`, where the
`String` is a failure message if the conversion wasn't possible.

`Bounded :a` means that `:a` has a minimum value `minBound` and a
maximum value `maxBound`. These are *values*, not *functions*, whose
type is inferred from context.

```
> (cl:use-package '(:coalton-library/math/bounded))
COMMON-LISP:T
> (coalton (make-list (the I16 minBound)
                      (the I16 maxBound)))
(-32768 32767)
```

`Transfinite :a` means that `:a` has NaN and/or infinite member
values, which are accessed via `nan` and `infinity`. Numbers can be
checked with `nan?` and `infinity?`.


## Arithmetic

`Num :a` means you can do ordinary addition `+`, subtraction `-`, and
multiplication `*` with `:a`. Note that `(- x)` does not negate `x`,
but rather curries `(fn (y) (- x y))`. Additionally, `Num` requires
objects of `:a` can be constructed from `Integer` values with
`fromInt`.

Arithmetic is always closed, and there is never implicit casting done
by arithmetic operations. You must convert explicitly. Note that

```
> (coalton (+ 0.5 10))
10.5
```

works not because of an implicit cast, but because the literal `10` is
statically understood to represent a `Single-Float` and is interpreted
as such at compile-time.

`Reciprocable :a` is a `Num` type that has multiplicative inverses
(with `reciprocal`) for most elements, and thus supports closed
division with `/`.

`Dividable :a :b` means that two elements of `:a` divide to produce a
`:b`. For instance, `(Dividable Integer Fraction)` means that
`Integer`s can divide to produce `Fraction`s. There might be more than
one instance for a given `:a`-type. This non-closed division is done
with `general/`. Of course, if `Reciprocable :a` has an instance, then
`Dividable :a :a` is automatically true.

`Remainder :a` is a `Num` type that looks roughly like an integral
domain, somewhere that quotients `(quo x y)` (or `(div x y)`) and
remainders `(rem x y)` (or `(mod x y)`) can be computed. Note that the
quotients and remainders have to be expressible as values in `:a`.

`Integral :a` is a `Remainder` type that can be converted to an
integer with `toInteger`.

A `Num` object `x` can be raised to the power of a non-negative
`Integral` object `p` with `(^ x p)`.

A `Reciprocable` object `x` can be raised to the power of an
`Integral` object `p` with `(^^ x p)`.

Both `^` and `^^` have to be "closed" in the first argument: powers of
integers have to result in integers, powers of floats have to return
floats. These functions are nothing more than repeated multiplication
of a value (or its reciprocal).

## Reals, rounding, and related classes

`Quantizable :a` is a type that allows for rounding with `floor` and
`ceiling`.

`Real :a` is a `Quantizable` and `Num` type, allowing us to
approximate a value `x` of type `:a` as a `Fraction` to an arbitrary
`n` bits of precision with `(real-approx n x)`.

`Rational :a` is a `Real` and `Ord` type that allows us to represent
any value of `:a` exactly (in the sense of `into` or `tryInto`) as a
fraction with `to-fraction`, and perhaps as a simpler fraction with
`best-approx`. If this does not make sense, consider that a value
might be equally well approximated by a variety of fractions:

```
> (cl:import '(coalton-library/math/real:to-fraction 
               coalton-library/math/real:best-approx
               coalton-library/math/real:inexact/))
COMMON-LISP:T
> (coalton (to-fraction 0.1d0))
3602879701896397/36028797018963968
> (coalton (best-approx 0.1d0))
1/10
> (coalton (inexact/ 1 10))
0.1d0
> (coalton (inexact/ 3602879701896397 36028797018963968))
0.1d0
```

With these classes, we have all sorts of convenient functions,
including rounding functions `floor`, `ceiling`, `round`, `truncate`,
`round-half-up`, and `round-half-down`; as well as convenient division
functions, like `safe/`, `floor/`, `ceiling/`, `round/`, `exact/`, and
`inexact/`.

## Complex numbers

`Complex :a` means two things!

- `Complex :a` is a **type** representing a complex number whose real
  and imaginary components are of type `:a`.

- `Complex :a` is a **class** representing objects which allows
  construction using a **method** called `complex`, and extraction of
  rectangular parts with `real-part` and `imag-part`. (This class does
  *not* imply that the real and imaginary components a values in `:a`
  may vary, however!)

**Note that real types are instances of the `Complex` class; they just
always have a zero imaginary part.**

The imaginary unit is `ii`.

There are currently no complex number literals, but they can be
constructed with the method `complex`. Their values are represented
(when possible) as Common Lisp complex number types.

```
> (coalton (complex 1.0 2.0))
#C(1.0 2.0)
> (coalton (complex (the Big-Float 1) (the Big-Float 2)))
#.(COALTON-LIBRARY/MATH/COMPLEX::%COMPLEX .10000000000000000e1 .20000000000000000e1)
```

Both of these values are technically internal representations that the
user ought not be concerned with.

`Polar :a` is a `Complex` and `Num` that supports the extraction of
the `phase` of a complex number, and its decomposition into magnitude
and phase with the `polar` method. The function `magnitude`. Though we
often work with complex numbers using real numbers, that doesn't need
to be the case. We can have discrete complex numbers with no
representation of angles.

## Powers, roots, and logs

We've already seen `^` and `^^`, but those are merely repeated
multiplication. What if we have fractional powers?

`Exponentiable :a` are types that allow `exp` (the exponential
function), `pow` (closed exponentiation), `ln` (the natural log), and
`(log b)` (log base-`b`).

`Radical :a` are types that allow `sqrt` and `nth-root`s. The roots
must be closed. An integer square root can be done with the function
`isqrt`, which is not relevant to the `Radical` class.

In both of these cases, the operations are closed. That means `(sqrt
-2.0d0)` will not result in a complex number. (By default, it results
in `nan`.)

```
> (cl:use-package '(:coalton-library/math/elementary))
COMMON-LISP:T
> (coalton (sqrt -2.0d0))
#<DOUBLE-FLOAT quiet NaN>
> (coalton (sqrt (complex -2.0d0 0.0d0)))
#C(8.659560562354934d-17 1.4142135623730951d0)
```

## Trigonometry

`Trigonometric :a` are types that support `sin`, `cos`, and `tan`; as
well as their inverses `asin`, `acos`, and `atan`.

If we have a type that is both `Trigonometric` and `Complex`, then we
get the `cis` function where `(cis t)` is $e^{it}$.

## $\pi$ and elementary functions

`Elementary :a` is a type that is `Reciprocable`, `Polar`,
`Trigonometric`, `Exponentiable`, and `Radical`. Despite the real grab
bag of classes here, `Elementary` types represent values that can go
into elementary functions. Moreover, if a type is `Elementary`, it
means it has a representation of `pi` and the exponential number `ee`
(which is $e\approx 2.71828$).

In addition to the aforementioned functions, we also get:

* hyperbolic trig: `sinh`, `cosh`, `tanh`, `asinh`, `acosh`, and `atanh`
* with `Ord`, the two-argument arctangent: `atan2`
* free implementation of `(Elementary (Complex :a))` and all of its
  predecessor classes

## Big floats

Arbitrary precision floats are supported in Coalton, but currently
requires loading a separate (but included) library:

```
(ql:quickload :coalton/library/big-float)
(cl:use-package '(:coalton-library/big-float))
```

This gives us a `Big-Float` type, as well as the following functions
for controlling precision:

* `(with-precision n f)` calls the function `f` with `Big-Float`
  precision set to `n` bits.
* `(set-precision! n)` globally sets the precision of `Big-Float`s to
  `n`.
* `(get-precision)` gets the current precision in bits.

For exmaple,

```
> (coalton (the Big-Float (* 4 (atan 1))))
.31415926535897931e1
> (coalton (set-precision! 500))
COALTON::UNIT/UNIT
> (coalton (the Big-Float (* 4 (atan 1))))
.31415926535897932384626433832795028841971693993751058209749445923078164062862089986280348253421170679821480865132823066470938446095505822317253594081283e1
```

Similarly, we can control the rounding mode, which is described by the
`RoundingMode` enumeration: `rndn` (round down), `rndz` (round toward
zero), `rndu` (round up), etc.

* `(with-rounding m f)` calls the function `f` with the rounding mode set to `m`. 
* `(set-rounding-mode! m)` globally sets the rounding mode to `m`.
* `(get-rounding-mode)` gets the current rounding mode.

Both precision and rounding can be controlled with
`with-rounding-mode` for the extent of a function call.

### Precision of big floats

The functions `with-precision` and `set-precision!` set the precision
of the floats themselves. It does *not* ensure precision of the
results. For example, lets first set our precision to 100 bits (about
30 decimal digits).

```
> (coalton (set-precision! 100))
COALTON::UNIT/UNIT
```

Now let's compute $\sin \pi$, which we know should be zero:

```
> (coalton (the Big-Float (sin pi)))
.12246467991473531772260659322748e-15
```

We see we got $0.122\times 10^{-15}$, which is about **half** of the
number of correct digits allowed by our precision.

How about $\sin (10^{1000} \pi)$, which should also be zero?

```
> (coalton (the Big-Float (sin (* (pow 10 1000) pi))))
.34821834409748947095450130704533e0
```

The state of affairs is even worse, we have **no** correct digits
after the decimal point!

Just like ordinary floats, `Big-Float`s demand care when writing
mathematical code. The good news, though, is that you're free to
experiment by changing the precision, possibly upping it until you
find convergence.

