---
title: "A Preview of Coalton 0.2"
date: 2026-03-12
math: true
hidden: true
---

By [Robert Smith](https://twitter.com/stylewarning)

*Coalton has had an exciting few years. It is being used for industrial purposes, being put to its limits as a production language to build good, reliable, efficient, and robust products. Happily, with Coalton, many products were shipped with tremendous success. But as we built these products, we noticed more of the gaps of the language. As such, we're setting the stage for the next tranche of Coalton work, and we're going to preview some of these improvements here.*

{{< toc >}}


## Departure from the currying tradition

One of the biggest changes coming to the next release of Coalton is a complete departure of what was once almost a part of the language's identity: Haskell-style curried functions. In Coalton (and Haskell), functions are typed as chains of arrows. This function

```
(define (f x y z)
  (+ x (* y z)))
```

has the type `Num :a => :a -> :a -> :a -> :a`. This means we could write `(f 1)` or `(f 1 2)` or `(f 1 2 3)` and all would be completely valid expressions. As Coalton programmers, we advertised this everywhere, from the language's README to conference presentations. The biggest selling points of this feature were

- **Simplicity**: Every function takes exactly one input and produces exactly one output. No exceptions. If you didn't care about the input or output, you used `Unit`, and we made special syntax for that.
- **Cool tricks**: You could write very short, elegant code. Want to double all elements of a list? `(map (* 2) list)`. Want a list-doubler function? `(map (* 2))`. This was especially helpful for very abstract, high-order code, where only the last couple arguments of a function were unimportant ports for plumbing large abstractions. (Think parser combinators where the last argument is the "thing to be parsed" input.) It also worked very well with Coalton's native `pipe` and `nest` macros.

However, in actually using Coalton, this feature seemed to be more of a nuisance than a producivity win. We found the following happen as a result of this design decision:

1. APIs were being designed around what was most convenient to curry, even if it bucked larger programming trends. For example, to get the *n*th element of a list `l`, we write `(index n l)`. Why? Because currying the index is more useful than currying the list. But every other language writes something like `l[n]`, `l.get(n)`, `(elt l n)`, etc. Even worse though was the fact you were forced to prioritize a currying order. If you didn't like it, you either used argument combinators like `flip` or you manually wrote a `fn`.
2. Allocation of closures became idiomatic. While Coalton has a lot of machinery to heuristically inline, much of which inspired by the multiplicity of partial applications, making heap allocation a built-in feature to *every* function definition was pushing the language in a direction we didn't want.
3. Type errors from currying mistakes propagate far away from their source. Have you ever forgotten to add an argument to a function, only to get a type error you didn't expect, far away from where the typo happened? It's usually because currying is legal, and the inferred value, something that looks like `:s -> :t`, gets propagated out, sometimes being "valid" in the chain of inference until it isn't.
4. Adding more expressive function calls—optional arguments, keyword arguments, new calling conventions—required hacking around the current system in inelegant and confusing ways.

As such, we are getting rid of this idiom. Instead, Coalton functions will have *fixed input arity*, and providing too many or too few arguments is an immediate type error. The above function would instead have the type

```
Num :t => :t * :t * :t -> :t
```

which we like to pronounce "tee by tee by tee to tee." People from OCaml or Standard ML may recognize this syntax as tuple syntax. In Coalton, the `*` is syntactically tied to the `->`. It's not a tuple constructor, but rather syntax of the function type. In fact, the type of the `Tuple` constructor is

```
(declare Tuple (:a * :b -> Tuple :a :b))
```

With this, the fixed input arity is strict; all arguments must be supplied. Coalton will no longer "auto-curry":

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton-toplevel
                (define (f x y z)
                  (+ x (* y z))))
;; F :: ∀ A. NUM A ⇒ (A * A * A → A)
; No value
COALTON-USER> (coalton (f 1.0 2.0 3.0))
7.0
COALTON-USER> (coalton (f 1.0 2.0))
error: Arity mismatch
   |
 1 |  (COALTON (F 1.0 2.0))
   |           ^^^^^^^^^^^ 
   Function call has 2 positional
    arguments but inferred type
    '(:A * :A * :A → :A)' takes 3
```

What if we want to have curried functions? We can still type and write them, but it will be more verbose. We have to curry it ourselves explicitly with either `fn` or our shorthand:

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton-toplevel
                (define f-curried \x.\y.\z.(f x y z)))
;; F-CURRIED :: ∀ A. NUM A ⇒ (A → (A → (A → A)))
; No value
```

Moreover, calling it will require nested applications.

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton (((f-curried 1.0) 2.0) 3.0))
7.0
```

This is a major change to the way Coalton is written. We think this is a good change for the following simple reason: when we flipped the switch to enable this new function style, **99% of code compiled just fine, only the type signatures broke.** What this means is that curried style wasn't even being used too much, and where it was, it took only a handful of characters to fix.


## Keyword arguments

In real-world Coalton code, we ran into a lot of instances where we want functions to have lots of options, especially functions which are often bindings or FFI-derived. To support this, we would make all sorts of *ad hoc* structs containing function options, and it all felt like disposable code goop.

Since we have fixed arity functions, we can now process keyword arguments easily.

```
(define-type Permission Read Write)

(define (open path &key (timeout None) (permission Read))
  ...)
```

Here, `open` has the type

```
String &key (:timeout (Optional Integer)) (:permission Permission) -> Handle
```

In this design, initial values are needed for all arguments, and each keyword argument is optional to supply at call sites.

It works for toplevel functions, methods, and `fn`.


## Multiple value returns

Coalton, somewhat experimentally, introduced "tuple unboxing": If a function `f` returned a two-element tuple, then internally, two versions of `f` would be compiled:

1. `f-unboxed`: an internal function that computed `f` but didn't construct the tuple (instead passing return values on the stack), and
2. `f`, as normal, constructing the tuple.

Then, Coalton would analyze where `f` was called, and decide if it could instead replace the call with `f-unboxed` if the result was being immediately destructured.

On one hand, this was a very welcome addition to Coalton. Existing APIs could become much more efficient (e.g., `quotRem`) without having to change anything. On the other hand, it created tremendous bloat in the compiler implementation (all this bookkeeping on tuple-returning functions) and program runtime (now tuple functions had two compiled entry points). Furthermore, this only worked for tuples with two components. Didn't work for `Tuple3`, didn't work with your own custom structs.

As such, this is one of the features we took a step back on in light of the other changes we made. With the change in how we handle input arity, we also now allow functions to natively return multiple values. For example, consider the Coalton function to split a string into two pieces. This is defined in the standard library as:

```
(declare split-at (UFix -> String -> (Tuple String String)))
(define (split-at n str)
  (Tuple (substring str 0 n)
         (substring str n (length str))))
```

In the next release of Coalton, it's now written as

```
(declare split-at (UFix * String -> String * String))
(define (split-at n str)
  (values (substring str 0 n)
          (substring str n (length str))))
```

If we want to use it, we need to "receive" both values. We can do this with two new `let`-syntax features:

```
;; short let
(define ...
  (let (values pre post) = (split-at 5 "hello world")
  ...)

;; regular let
(define ...
  (let (((values pre post) (split-at 5 "hello world")))
    ...))
```

Unlike Common Lisp, multiple values *always* need to be handled, even if ignored.

When calling from Lisp, we can receive multiple values, using new updated `lisp` syntax:

```
(lisp (-> Integer * Integer) (num den)
  (cl:floor num den))
```

This tells Coalton that two `Integer` values will be returned. The `lisp` operator now always needs the `->`, even if just a single value is returned.

### The role of `Unit` and `Void`

In Coalton, `Unit` was the value used to idiomatically indicate a function has no useful input or output. Since the next release of Coalton will have functions with true zero-input or zero-output behavior, this idiom will no longer be used. A function defined as

```
(define (f)
  ...)
```

will have type `Void -> ...`, and functions that previously returned `Unit` as an empty value will instead have type `... -> Void`.

Similarly, `Void` as defined before was never truly meaningful. It meant to denote functions that don't return or don't terminate, but now its meaning is exactly "no inputs" or "no outputs".


## Syntax for collections and associations

One of Coalton's greatest weaknesses right now is syntax for collections. Even lists require arduously calling a `make-list` macro. In the next release of Coalton, we are introducing two new syntaxes for collections and associations.

A **collection** is just a composite of elements. It may be a list, set, vector, or something else. We deliberately don't define anything more than that. Collections can be written with brackets: `[1 2 3]`. What type should it be? Well, we have the whole power of the type system, so it should be any type that we could construct from a collection of objects! Hence, this is an "overloaded literal" that will work for any collection type implementing a new `FromCollection` type class.

```
(define-class (FromCollection :COLL :ELT (:COLL -> :ELT))
  ;; Create an empty collection
  (make-empty-collection (Void -> :COLL))
  ;; Adjoin an element to a collection
  ;; May be pure or effectful.
  (adjoin-to-collection  (:COLL * :ELT -> :COLL))
  ;; Finalize the empty collection
  (finalize-collection (:COLL -> :COLL)))
```

In the event of ambiguity, it defaults to `Seq :t`, just like numerical variables default to `Integer`.

An **association** is a collection of associated elements. It may be a hash table, dictionary, association list, or something else. Like collections, we deliberately don't define anything more than that. Associations are written with curly braces:
```
{"hello" => 1
 "world" => 2
 "!"     => 3}
```
Like collections, associations are also overloaded; all you need is an instance of the new `FromAssociation` class:

```
(define-class (FromAssociation :ASSOC :KEY :VALUE (:C -> :KEY :VALUE))
  ;; Create an empty association
  (make-empty-association (Void -> :ASSOC))
  ;; Adjoin a key-value pair to an association
  ;; May be pure or effectful.
  (adjoin-to-association  (:ASSOC * :KEY * :VALUE -> :ASSOC))
  ;; Finalize the association
  (finalize-association (:ASSOC -> :ASSOC)))
```

In the event of ambiguity, it defaults to `Seq (Tuple :k :v)`, just like numerical variables default to `Integer`.


### Collection and association comprehensions

Collections and associations can also be written as comprehensions. Instead of listing the items explicitly, one can generate them:

```
[<elt expr> <clause>+]
{<key expr> => <val expr> <clause>+}
```

In both cases, the clauses can be one of three things:

- `with <var> = <val>`: Assign a variable to a value.
- `for <var> in <iter>`: Iterate a variable across an iterator.
- `when <expr>`: Guard against a Boolean predicate.

Clauses are executed left-to-right like a little nested loop, and the "body" is the expressions for the elements being produced.


## Syntax for short lambda functions

We decided early on that Coalton should have easy ways to make new functions. Instead of the traditional `lambda`, we call our anonymous functions `fn`, as in `(fn (x) (* x x))`. But since we got rid of the "currying style" of function definitions, `fn` has become a lot more prominent, and we think that this is still a little too wordy for very small, short functions. As such, we're introducing short lambda syntax. What we wrote as

```
(fn (x) x)
(fn (f x y) (f y x))
(fn () 0)
(fn (_ a _) a)
```

can now be written as

```
\x.x
\fxy.(f y x)
\.0 
\_a_.a
```

The "overhead" is just 2 non-shift characters, on American keyboard layouts at least.

The purpose of this isn't to allow code to be golfed, but rather to allow "throwaway" functions to just take less space and ceremony.


## Scoped type variables and `forall`

Often in a Coalton declaration, we would introduce type variables of interest:

```
(declare f (:input -> :output))
```

The type variables `:input` and `:output` were mere placeholders; they could be named anything. And then within the function, if we referred to those variables, they would be seen as distinct.

```
(define (f x)
  (let p = (the (Proxy :input) Proxy)   ; :input distinct from declaration!
  ...)
```

So, to get around it, you had to somehow put in a sneaky constraint that locked the `define`'s `:input` against the `declare`d `:input`.

In the next release of Coalton, we're introducing `forall` that allows scoping type variables over the definition. So now if we write:

```
(declare f (forall (:input :output) :input -> :output))
(define (f x)
  (let p = (the (Proxy :input) Proxy))
  ...)
```

Coalton will know that both `:input` variables refer to the same one. Similarly, if method definitions in `define-class` are typed with `forall`, then method instances may use those type variables.

In order to have `define` or `define-instance` see the variables, the `forall` is *required*; it's an operator that introduces scope. Without it, the variables are still seen as effectively free and independent.

One fun example of an improvement was in Coalton's standard library. We had a function for numerical casting, but only if the number was in bounds of the destination type. The source code was:

```
(inline)
(declare unify (:ty -> :ty -> :ty))
(define (unify _ use)
  use)

(declare cast-if-inbounds ((Ord :src) (Bounded :target) =>
                           :src -> (Result String :target)))
(define (cast-if-inbounds x)
  (let max-bound = maxBound)
  (let min-bound = minBound)
  (let int = (the Integer (unsafe-cast x)))
  (if (or (< int (unsafe-cast min-bound))
          (> int (unsafe-cast max-bound)))
      (Err "value out of range")
      (Ok
       (unify max-bound (unify min-bound
                               (unsafe-cast x)))))))
```

Here, we have a function `unify` that does nothing but to constrain the type variable of the first argument to the type variable of the second argument. It's then used to capture the types of the target `(unsafe-cast ...)` so that `minBound` and `maxBound` will resolve correctly. It's all very tangled.

With scoped type variables, we instead have:

```
(declare cast-if-inbounds
  (forall (:src :target)
    ((Ord :src) (Bounded :target) => :src -> (Result String :target))))
(define (cast-if-inbounds x)
  (let max-bound = (the :target maxBound))
  (let min-bound = (the :target minBound))
  (let int = (the Integer (unsafe-cast x)))
  (if (or (< int (unsafe-cast min-bound))
          (> int (unsafe-cast max-bound)))
      (Err "value out of range")
      (Ok (the :target (unsafe-cast x))))))
```

Simple and direct: Just use `:target` directly in the function definition. No type acrobatics needed.

## Real algebraic numbers and `xmath`

Coalton has always supported numbers that are not traditionally found in programming language standard libraries, like transfinite and hyperdual numbers. Coalton's variety of numbers are tremendously important for a wide variety of applications, from CAD to mathematical optimization.

However, even with the numbers we have, we still don't have the ability to do certain numerical computations exactly. For example, suppose you are making a CAD program, and you want to see if two line segments are equal in length. One line segment, your CAD program calculates

$$a = \sqrt{2+\sqrt{3}}$$

and the other

$$b = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}(\sqrt{3}+1).$$

You approximate them both in your CAD engine to check if they might be equal:

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton-toplevel
                (define a (the F32 (sqrt (+ 2 (sqrt 3)))))
                (define b (the F32 (* (/ (sqrt 2) 2) (1+ (sqrt 3))))))
;; B :: F32
;; A :: F32
; No value

COALTON-USER> (coalton (make-list a b))
(1.9318516 1.9318516)
```

So it appears they're the same. But for CAD, how do we know this isn't just some catastrophic floating point issue? If we push this design to manufacturing, how do we know these parts will fit together?

If rational numbers can be seen as "exact fractions", then real algebraic numbers can be seen as "exact roots". Not just square roots. Any root to any polynomial. Coalton adds support for these. Instead of using `F32` to represent our measured lengths, we can use `RealAlgebraic`:

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton-toplevel
                (define a (the RealAlgebraic (sqrt (+ 2 (sqrt 3)))))
                (define b (the RealAlgebraic (* (/ (sqrt 2) 2) (1+ (sqrt 3))))))
;; B :: REALALGEBRAIC
;; A :: REALALGEBRAIC
; No value
```

Now when we test equality, it is an *exact* test. No numerical approximation, no epsilons.

```
COALTON-USER> (coalton (== a b))
COMMON-LISP:T
```

This tells us that, despite having different forms, $a=b$ exactly.

Like rational numbers are merely real numbers that solve
$$ux+v=0$$
for integers $u$ and $v$, real algebraic numbers are merely real numbers that solve

$$u_0 + u_1x + u_2x^2 + \cdots + u_nx^n=0$$

for some nonnegative integer $n$ and integers $u_k$. (A direct consequence of this is that the rational numbers are a subset of the real algebraic numbers.) The square root of 2 is such a number because it's the positive solution to

$$x^2-2=0.$$

This is a much broader class of numbers than rationals, but it's not everything. There are many numbers, namely the *transcendental* numbers like $\pi$, that aren't represented by these. So they're not a silver bullet, but substantially broaden the class of things we can do exact arithmetic with.

We realize these number types aren't useful to everybody. Nor are other advanced math features brought in to Coalton. As such, we are introducing a separate standard library module called `coalton/xmath`, for "extended math". It's built in to Coalton, it's just not loaded as a dependency by default. Here, we'll find

- Dyadic numbers
- Dual and hyperdual numbers
- Arbitrary precision floating point numbers
- Computable real numbers
- Real algebraic numbers
- Fast Fourier transforms

This will be a place of much extension in the future, since mathematical computation is a core driver for Coalton's development.


## Type system soundness

Very famously, Hindley-Milner is not sound in the presence of mutating operators. Coalton inherited this issue, and has had it since inception. This problem was never fully addressed, because these kinds of issues just didn't come up in practice. However, careful programming only takes you so far; it may guarantee your code is safe, but not the code you depend on.

As such, we've now introduced weak type variables that restrict when types are allowed to generalize in circumstances that may involve mutability. It's basically transparent to the user completely; new Coalton types that use `repr :native` are automatically "marked" as being mutable, and thus are limited in circumstances they can use safely.

Bringing about this change had zero repercussions in any extant software written in Coalton, but it gives assurance that the Coalton type system won't produce false-positives. 


## Standard library renaming

Everything in the standard library was called `coalton-library/foo`. Laboriously, when writing package local nicknames, you'd end up with a half-dozen or so `coalton-library` imports. We dropped the "`-library`", so now the Coalton standard library is just `coalton/foo`. Old `coalton-library` names will still work, but will be removed in the future.


## Versioning

We're not ready to go to 1.0 yet, but we are ready to start signaling when we make major breaking changes. As such, Coalton will begin to be versioned. Versions pre-1.0 will mostly be qualitative indications of major additions, removals, or changes to the language. The next (and first official!) release will be **Coalton 0.2**, and we want to have it out the door by **March 23, 2026**.

## The future of Coalton

We expect another period of development with this new language shape to see where the rough edges are, and where we need to round things out. We have an inkling of a feeling that linear/affine types, explciit resource management, and quality-of-life improvements will be on the docket for 0.3, but we'll see.

*Thanks to Colin O'Keefe, Jesse Bouwman, Joseph Garvin, and Owen Radcliffe for comments on the draft.*
